Oh, sorry.
kept the uh
down in the applicant. I think uh
probably
a fair amount of support for you doing
what you want to do,
but I also understand that it is
and so
take a look.
I know
we we got to where we are tonight
because we might not have been as happy
as we could have been in which round to
do it.
And so we're on a bit of a clock
to get this in the dome.
I think we can. Um,
but it's not going to be the lack of
Brian.
There are a few
Did you get the comments
that he had on your
Okay. So, there are are a fair number of
comments
applications. Some of them are pretty
easy to fix. Some of them
not so much.
Why don't you tell us what you're
asking?
Well, basically what I'm looking to do
is slow. I guess we're getting the guys
hopefully they can hear me.
Basically, we're looking to have events
at the farm. um comedy shows
uh I some you say concerts you think of
big you know orchestration but it's you
know small bands um
karaoke nights just to bring some
entertainment into the farm and
hopefully eventually
make some money um you know the last you
know we did run them last year because I
didn't know you know that there would be
ordeals permits and stuff and you know
basically I lost money on every single
But, uh, I think it was still good for
the community. I think everyone that
came down was very impressed with the
layout of the, um, farm and and and some
people don't even know the farm's there.
Um, people come in like, how do you know
this was down here? And I've done a lot
of work to the farm since I've uh,
purchased it. And, you know, as we all
know, less and less people are buying
Christmas trees as the cost of the
Christmas trees um, have gone up. So
obviously so I need to offset that
hopefully and be able to keep um you
know the properties and the businesses
private. So again you know I've been
looking also I've been I've always tried
since I owned it to try to get the
farmers market here because I thought
the venue that they had that was you
know would been better served on a
bigger property. So that was something I
jumped into try to jump into this year.
it didn't pan out uh because I think I
started a little late. Didn't get enough
vendors to uh buy in. But hopefully I'm
not I'm not giving up on that. Hopefully
that's something we can do in the
future. Um I think Andover is a farming
town. It would be nice to have a a
farmers market in Andover. Um but again,
you know, a lot of this stuff takes it
takes a lot of work. as you know, uh,
John's helping me out, you Wayne's
helped me out, um, with the with the
procedures cuz I'm not used to, you
know, procedures, permits, you know, I,
you know, even when I bought the farm,
you know, Bob gave you some instructions
and and it was basically Bob do whatever
you want until someone told Bob not to
do it. Um, you know, and I didn't know
that a permits would be uh or needed for
something on the farm that was, you
know, pretty off the road and
interfering with uh limited uh people. I
I've always reached out to the neighbors
um and asked if there was concerns or
anything like that. So, basically, we're
just trying to bring some, you know,
usable entertainment to the to the farm.
Um, you know, as future goes, I I'd love
to possibly have weddings there. Um, you
know, stuff like stuff like that. Just
making it more of a a venue.
But yes, I'm not,
you know, when you asked me to write the
per the these regulations, I was
dumbfounded. I was like, that's not my
forte.
I got you. It's basically not mine
either. That's why you know I did watch
and it's hard but it it is hard. I
understand that certainly what what uh
John's got posted up there. You know we
talk about agricultural accessory uses
and that's uh to pick your own events
and you add strawberries I guess. I
don't know what you have cut your own
trees. So that's probably you know what
what you got there. The non-aggriculture
accessory uses are probably where we
get, you know, the questions coming up
and we'll we'll get to that. There's a
couple of little
use site plan review and special permit
here a little bit interchangeably a few
different things. Got to you get that
straightened out. Got a couple of
subsections in in that general you down
there. John scrolls down a little bit.
um
at right there where it says subsections
283 and 284 of this section. I don't
think we have any 283 and 284, so I
don't know what what those are. Um
yeah, it was my understanding when I was
putting these together that uh there
would be back and forth. So, I didn't
want to go fullbore
um into it because I wanted to have more
give and take. Um for instance, I didn't
want to say shut off at 9:30 or shut off
at night. That would be something that
we would want to uh more have more of a
discussion on. And um and again, me not
fully writing this myself, kind of
having intel from you guys as well.
Thank my comment. I I think it's
important to point out that these
regulations don't just apply to you in
your operation. They would apply
townwide. Uh for instance, um if a
restaurant town wanted to have outdoor
entertainment, I believe these
regulations would apply.
I'm not sure because this is
specifically listed as agro tourism or
agro business. It does talk about the
industrial business. Yeah. believe the
uh the question I had and uh well I know
we're going to focus very heavily on on
where you want to go Ryan because that's
the way it is but if Herspar wanted to
to do something this would be the
regulation that they would have to
follow one of the questions that Wayne
and I had talked about a little bit is
you're in an industrial zone first
farm's in a a residential zone Um,
do we want this to apply to a
residential zone or is this limited to
an industrial zone? I think it needs to
be residential zone 2. That's where most
of the farms are. So, we're looking at
something that would be applicable to
anybody who's out there doing the farm
business. Um, we can get there. That
that'll that'll work. the uh
I guess at this point,
do any commission members have any
specific questions of Ryan before we go
to get some input from the public on
what they think about this?
I I think it's a great idea. Farmers
market are always profitable. Every time
has them, you know. Um, I think we got a
lot of cottage and commentary.
We offload some of those folks there.
Um, some make sure you're trying to talk
up for the microphone. Can y'all hear me
online?
Are you okay? Yeah. And and you know,
weddings too. I mean, you're trying to
keep the business alive, keep it going,
right? I mean, who has the right to do
so? And you got to get creative. So, I
think weddings are are great locally,
especially folks that want to stay in
the town and
little concerts, live concerts are
always great, you know. Um, so I think
it's going to be good for the town as
far as growth wise.
So, one of one of the things that that I
don't have an answer to, don't know if
it even is applicable to us in the
planning and zoning is at some point a
tag sale is no longer a tag sale. It's a
store.
When we have these little events, at
some point they're no longer little
events.
It's a business. You know, a wedding is
a business.
I don't know how
to capture that transition. Maybe it's
not even important. Maybe that's
somebody else will come get the taxes
from you that you're breaking in on all
these events. I don't know. But but at
some point we're not into the little tag
sale kind of things. It's bigger than
that and it's got to have a bigger
expectation with the facilities and all
that. So that's one of the things that I
was thinking about as we, you know, go
through this. Well, can can I ask a
question? What do you want to do? What
do you see see this? What I see I see it
just basically the farmers market
basically what I laid out the farmers
markets the you know I do I like to have
events again I can't do it every weekend
every I like to do it twice a month you
want this to be a business that goes
into something that's a bunch going to
get taxed or is it something Oh yeah.
Well I get taxed anyways because I I own
businesses all my businesses you know I
have three businesses so they're all
going to get taxed. um on the income
that I bring in. Yeah. Um but yeah, you
know, that's the the end goal would be
to make some money, but again, as most
of my people know, most things I do, I
break even on or lose. Um but it's it's
about, you know, for this, it's about
providing something. I I think it's it's
a great venue to just to have people
come together. There's not many things
that go on in this town,
uh in this town. It'd be nice nice thing
to have and I have a nice bag for it.
You know what I mean?
Any other questions or comments with
Andreas? Yeah, I'm just trying to tie
the uh tie it together, Chad, as as to
what your concerns are and what he wants
to do with
that answer.
Other commission members have questions
or John John could you uh put up um
something that Ryan had written up that
the events that he was going to have. Is
that possible? Uh I don't know if I have
that. It's on the town's website. Oh,
okay. Hang on. Uh yeah, give me a
moment.
You're looking for his essentially his
narrative.
Yeah.
page
everywhere
locations
looking for that. Any other commission
have questions?
You think I I feel the same way you do,
Jed, about this whole thing that the
farming
are easy. It's the non-farmming uses.
Is it the Sorry. Is it the the the event
schedule that you're talking about?
Yeah. Okay. All right. Hang on.
Somebody comment
We will we'll give everybody a chance.
If I forget, just let me know. Put that
little flag up again.
I'm saying is most of this is non-farm
related. So that's that's why this is
going to it's going to take more time
going over
those uses.
I like I like what was written what John
wrote or and uh did Branch go over that
Jed?
Jed I'm sorry I muted you guys on the on
the town side so someone's gonna have to
hit unmute on the on the laptop.
Okay. All right. You're good.
Yeah, we can hear you now. Mark Grant
has not looked through the list of
events. He has seen a copy of the
proposed regulations. He has provided
some comments on that. Um
and it's too early really. Yeah, it's
kind of on the preliminary side the uh
but if if there's any any questions here
question I'm saying I think it's a good
idea. I know my high school reunion was
at the Salem herb farm the herb farm
down there in Salem. made it into a
place for a vending mostly outside but
it had a roof over one side of the old
part of it and it was a really neat
thing and that's the kind of thing I
could see being done here. Okay, gotcha.
Yep. Um I'm going to go Kevin Arnerson
any anything with you before we move on
here?
No, I think I have a pretty clear
understanding uh of what they're looking
to do. Um I definitely support the
ideas, but like you said, and like Scott
said, we just have to be
careful with how we approach it. Um I
also understand certain things where in
the farm, you know, everyone's trying to
make it and in the farming world it can
be a bit tough right now. Uh so I
understand looking for other avenues as
well.
Okay. Thanks, Kevin. Amarie, anything.
Everybody read the the regulation, Jed.
Say again, Scott. Did everybody read the
regulation?
I went over it. I found some uh spelling
things and some things that needed to be
changed in there. Yeah. and Wayne that
he can go over with with Brian later on.
We'll we'll take care of that. I just
you what I really want to get tonight is
a sense of uh you know we got a lot of
people from the public here and I want
to get a chance to hear what they've got
to say and uh and then we'll start
working on it with with their input in
mind.
Uh Chad, I put my comment in the chat. I
don't know if you saw it um but like
wineries and some breweries are
considered agurism and they have um
music and vendor fairs things like that
all the time. So I don't know how this
would compare.
So if
you can I provide a little
clarification?
Yes. Go ahead John. So yeah, so for the
record, John Guskowski, uh, consulting
town planner. I did I, you know, I'd
helped, um, Ryan a little bit with the
initial language and and yes, so some of
these some of the references to, you
know, section 2A3 or whatever would have
to be adjusted to fit this in the right
place in the regulations, but broadly
speaking, this is intended to do sort of
to the two separate things that you
described, Jed. Um it it intended to
because the town did not have any kind
of regulation really at all for events
or activities that took place on a farm
that involved some public interface. And
so the idea was to not only define that
but regulate it in a sort of a two-tier
system. The the lowest tier being things
that are clearly agriculturally related
like obviously pick your own operations
um you know that which is you know the
Christmas tree farm and things like
that. um which is you know different
from the actual cultivation of whatever
is being cultivated on the farm. Um and
then the other tier
um would be those events that were just
being described that are that are not
really agriculturally related but use
the atmosphere and the and the setting
of the of the farm um as a lovely event
space. So you know weddings uh that that
you know reunions, events, things like
that are not strictly agriculturally
related but obviously um promote public
activity and tourism and gathering and
things like that. And obviously because
that has the the whole point of this
regulatory process is to identify and
mitigate
um you know potential conflicts or
potential concerns. And those are
standard things, traffic, noise, um
odor, you know, neighbor impacts, um and
and those sorts of things. And so
because the the non strict farming
activities do have the highest potential
for some, you know, negative
externalities as far as neighbors are
concerned, that would be a special
permit. And so, you know, what Ryan is
sort of doing is
submitting not only a text amendment
that would be applicable to any
agricultural property in town, but also
proposing his personal slate of
activities
um for Fitch Family Farms. And and so
it's there's there's really two issues
going on here. One is the regulation and
one is Ryan's slate of activities. and
and the commission should do what they
can to keep those things separate.
Yep. Thanks, John. John, can can I ask a
question?
I'm sorry. Who's that? Who is asking?
Wayne. Oh, hey. Yeah, sure. Um on a egg
related events, um you said uh you spoke
about uh pick your own like pick your
own Christmas trees, pick your own
strawberries. Are are we really
interested in rel in regulating that
activity or something along the lines of
um having Santa Claus visit the farm
while trees are being picked
and uh you know driving people around on
a sleigh or something like that or
well I think yeah the answer is the
answer is we want to deal with both at
but but the question is at what level of
view because again you know agriculture
growing trees is I think is really what
all all the town talks about in terms of
agriculture growing trees you know
chopping hay growing corn that sort of
thing that that is in essentially an
activity that does not engage with the
public when you're inviting the public
that's what that's what land use
regulations is about is to determine the
the level of um you know activity and
potential for, you know, public health,
safety, and welfare concerns. And so
when you're bringing the public, even if
they're just, you know, cutting down
their own Christmas tree, not seeing
Santa Claus or taking a sleigh ride or
something like that, there's still
traffic generated and potential for
noise, but that's that's a fairly low
standard. And so what's being proposed
in this regulation is those strictly
agricultural activities like pick your
own tree or you know pick your own
strawberries or whatever is just a
straight permit from from you as zoning
officer that you can just sign off
because that's that's allowed. But, you
know, as you ramp up and and you know,
there's going to be some of these things
that are grayer and you probably put
your finger on one of them that, you
know, it's a pick your own, but there's
this enhanced feature. You can talk to
Santa, you can go on a sleigh ride or
something like that. um that I think you
know the the question that the
commission needs to ask itself when
setting up these rules is at what level
does the the the amount of public
interface and in public activity on the
site constitute something that the
commission would want to look at with a
little bit more scrutiny. So, I I think
it all needs to be regulated at some
level, but it's just a question of,
"Yeah, go ahead. We'll sign off. You can
do this as a right versus no, we really
need to come you have you bring you in
and have the neighbors comment because
there's opportunity for, you know,
significant disruption." So, it, you
know, the example you site is probably a
little bit of a gray area, but I do
think we need to clarify what the town's
position is. And, you know, when you
say, "Are we asking for this?" You know,
it's it's not up to me. It's up to the
commission.
Exactly. Okay. And I think we can come
through that fairly easily. I think it's
going to be at the higher end of the uh
non-aggricultural uses that we struggle
a little bit. Um so that's all we'll say
about that point.
I am going to go uh through the
guest attendees we have uh online first
before we go around the room here. And
the first up on my list is
Aaron Hbert. Uh you got any comments?
Aaron?
Uh yes I do. So I'm gonna try to keep
this very brief and quick. Um, when I
saw this online, I I actually called a
number for Fitch Farm. And I think I
spoke to Ryan who said he had only done
one or two events. Um, which coincides
with the weekends that I've spent on
Bear Swamp on my back porch trying to
enjoy the solace of the seven acres and
and thinking there was a band playing
right on my back porch. Um, and it takes
me about 25 minutes to walk down to
where the bridge is being rebuilt or the
the old sand pits um through the woods.
I can't imagine that sound traveling
that far if it was not cranked up. Um, I
don't begrudge anybody um any type of
anything for the community. I I I
applaud Ryan. I I hope this works out
for him. Um, but from what was explained
to me was that he only did one or two
events to try this out and basically the
town told him this is the verbatim the
conversation we had on the phone. Um,
that what he was doing this this is the
permit that he's applying for that he
needs to do what he's doing now or what
he tried to do with a few events. Um,
that being said, my question is, does
this open up the door to um, you know,
500 people at a concert that goes on
till 9, 10, 11:00 at night? Does it does
it regulate the days of the week? Um,
uh, or is the town just going to Are
there going to be are you guys able to
write in specific clauses specific to
his permit and other people's permits,
or is it just a blanket where the town
says, "Well, it's approved. there's
nothing we can do and we're stuck for
five or six days a week listening to,
you know, somebody that sounds like
they're right on our back porch. In
other words, um,
how can I how can I word this? Did I
lose you? I I got the I see what's
there. I'm I'm a novice, so you guys
kind of got to break this down to me. I
understand there's a lot of stuff
written and a lot of stuff is going to
explain, but I don't really understand
all the verbiage and all the um I guess
basically I don't want to see this. um
he's applying for what he's saying is
just well that's not going to happen. I
can promise you that. Is it going to be
in writing is my question. So um other
than that I wish him all the success in
the world. Um it's and again like the
one thing I would disagree with is that
he said he reached out to neighbors. I
don't know if he reached out to pe
people directly next to him but as far
as everybody up and down Bear Swamp who
has heard this on their back porches or
in their backyards. Um nobody reached
out to them. Yeah. Thank you. Want to
talk here tonight. Let me address a
couple of your specifics there in the
does have hours that are allowed. Those
are proposed by, you know, Ryan. Uh I
don't know that that's, you know, what
will be agreed to or whatever. That's a
commission decision that we're not going
to get into tonight, but it is specified
in there. Um there's there's a couple of
things that are written in there that
I'm not sure uh
that the st the the standard is pretty
severe in what we've got drafted here in
in the general requirements. Such uses
or events shall not create a nuisance by
noise, vent frequency, odors, trash
traffic, and are contained in the
parcels. That's a pretty high standard
to meet. I don't know that anybody can
meet that one, but you know, obviously,
uh, you might think that there's a
nuisance there. Okay. No, no, no. So,
again, this is the first time I'm seeing
a lot of this and maybe I just didn't do
my research, so this gives me some
comfort. So, sorry. Go ahead.
that I will um point out here is that uh
and I can't find it. So I'll just
What are you looking for, Jed? Under
standards, it's sub paragraph C
and it says commission satisfaction that
sound can be attenuated to a level not
higher than background noise at the
property boundary.
I I don't know what that means to you,
Ryan.
I know what it means to me.
And uh
so they're they're your words. You
present it to the commission. How how do
you uh how do you deal with something
like that? Uh I thought there was a
decimal
um reading that I think we I thought
that we mentioned prior to um you're
talking on the laundry line. I Yes. You
have boundary line with your neighbors.
Oh,
background noise. I mean, that's kind of
vague. What's What's background noise?
Kind of vague and kind of low because,
you know, if you're on route six,
background noise is higher. Pretty loud,
louder than a music problem. So, anyhow,
that's it. I just point out that um and
so again for Eric's benefit, the benefit
of anybody else that might be here, what
we do is we draft the regulation that
has a lot of requirements for different
things in it. And then the case of any
of these events that we're talking about
of a non-aggricultural nature,
any applicant, Ryan, Hurst Farm,
whatever, would have to come back to us
with a special permit
that we would go through to look at the
exact specifics with his site. What he's
going to do to attenuate the sound at
the boundaries could be landscaping.
There could be all kinds of different
things. But how are we going to make
these regulations work to protect his
neighbors? So, and that would be that's
you know, right now we're looking at
starting that process next month. So,
you interested in that. But that's
that's where we're headed that to go and
then that would in addition to this
being approved by the commission that
special permit to do any of those other
things would be approved by the
commission. And those would be the
specifics that we would uh enforce on uh
on the F family front. I'm going to move
down to Jennifer Bird Death.
Hi. Can you hear me? Okay,
great. Hi. Um I live on 154 Bear Swamp
Road, which is not not directly across
from the farm. Um just a little bit down
the street. Um, and I I love the concept
of the agricultural events, of course. I
think that's fabulous for our town. And
I do agree that we need to be very, very
careful when we are putting things into
our plan, whether it's agriculture or
the non-aggricultural, because we'll
start setting precedents even when we
approve permits.
And also as a family who has a business
in town in a in a business zone, um I
realize also this could apply to to my
family's business. And I when I look
over what was put up briefly, it does
not state an acreage requirement for
business. I believe it was business and
industrial zones. It just said
sufficient space. So technically
you're you're you are we are opening
things up. We're opening things up to a
little bit more. From what I read, that
literally means, hey, you could have a
concert at Andover Landscaping. You
know, you could have a massive concert
there as long as there's enough people
to park or it's a potential, you know,
for the permit. And there are are other
farms in town in other areas um that of
course that would open it up for too.
you know, there's some large properties
around us. And I I do support Erin in
the fact that um some of the although
I'm a huge music and concert lover
myself, some of the the events that have
already gone on have been significantly
loud. And though I don't think anyone
cares if it's occasional or random, I am
very very concerned that
potentially,
just potentially, it has to be written
in well that we start giving permits
um for the non-aggricultural
and suddenly
all of us on Bear Swamp Road on, you
know, on the Bunker Hill side of the
street in our backyards are having
concerts until 900 p.m. on the weekend
weekdays. And what was it? I believe 12
uh I forgot the time on the the week
nights. Maybe it was 10:00. Um
I'm that's that would be my only concern
would be the special events and and as a
horse owner, I'm concerned about
fireworks in my backyard also. And I'm
not sure how fireworks would work into
the special permits. So if they would
start having massive fireworks shows or
otherwise.
Um just a just a cons just a thought
about that. I think I think a few people
have mentioned that already speaking
that we definitely need to be very
careful regarding setting a precedent
for the special permits and it and
they're kind of vague. The requirements
to receive the special permit are a
little bit vague. So maybe they could
just be finessed and worked on a little
bit. Thank you. Okay. Thank you,
Jennifer.
uh
phone number there. Yeah, I think the
phone number is Leanne. So, I think
that's everybody online. Obviously, we
got a lot of people here tonight. Um I
would like to keep the comments as brief
as we can. We'll start right down with
you if you can state your name. Hi, Jed.
It's Elaine Bookart. I'm online.
See you there, Elaine. Hi. Um, yeah, I
just I I just wanted to pipe in. I mean,
as chairman of the Economic Development
Commission, we're we're all for Ryan
succeeding. And, you know, we we would
love to see something like this working
out for, you know, I don't see every
other night every night concert. Maybe
the the occasional concerts, weekend
concerts, something like that. Certainly
the farmers market. um he's had, you
know, like the funky monkey, the vendors
and all that kind of stuff are great.
Those are great things to have and we
certainly want to encourage that to
happen. So, we wouldn't want to, you
know, squash it. I mean, I do understand
the noise and it's kind of interesting.
I don't think anybody really realized
how close Beer Swamp was to Ryan's
property and that they were listening to
the bands. It was like, "Wow, we just
looked at a map and that was like, oh,
that's interesting." you know, but we're
just trying to now put a lot of thought
into it so that and it will be rules
that everyone has to follow um
in town. So, that's why we're trying to
get something boilerplate, but certainly
whenever you do a permit process,
there's going to be some customization
based on what's being requested. Um, but
we're definitely all for it and uh and
certainly, you know, hope this uh comes
to be. Thanks,
Thanks Ela. Thank you. Now we start the
course. Any can I interject a 10-second
thought? I know I already had a chance
to talk, but can I give you 10 seconds
of your time? Uh, no. And when
everybody hasn't gone home because we're
into tomorrow,
got to get to the people now. Thank you.
Thank you. I'm trying to get to the guy
in the corner.
Yeah, I'm I'm his neighbor. Probably
have more land areaing
ordering him than anyone else. But uh
music
I can hear it, but I have woods between
me. I suggested to him today if anyone
complains, just put a barrier behind
where they're playing the music and on
the side where they're playing the music
and it'll block a lot of it out. I I
I've never bed before 10:00.
I really have to listen to hear the
music coming through my windows of air
conditioning in the summer. I'm not
really worried about what's going on
down there. I really am not at all. Um
address name and address for the record.
The address is 405 room 6. I'm right
behind behind their yellow house and uh
I have 20 some acres there. What's your
name? And I'm very happy with What's
your name? I'm sorry I don't know you.
We need your name. You want me to put
you in the record? Sure. Edward.
Okay. Thank you, Edward.
Next. Um I'll speak on behalf of myself.
My wife and I both own over and over. So
we have business in town. We do also
we're 415 group six. Uh my personal
feeling is um the noise that is coming
from Ryan's farm is something that we
enjoy. We can go down and enjoy it. Um I
think the selection of music he has
picked typically has been um pretty
mellow, pretty chill. I'm one of the
musicians that performed at his place.
So I I know that the the noise has
always been a concern. And the other
thing I would recommend is knowing the
number of venues that are like-minded
like this to give Brian an opportunity
to make make an investment. he's already
made an investment in a small stage area
and for him to make additional
investments in like sound barriers and
such like that. Um you can certainly
look at places like the farm on Carter
Hill and Marboro. They've got a full
music venue. They do v um they have a
farm. They do weddings. So there's lots
of people who are doing this and
capitalizing on a way to make a property
more, you know, attractive to come and
visit as well as generating revenue from
town. So I think it'd be a fantastic
addition to our town. Okay. Thank you,
Wendy. You're all done. Did it? I'll
just add really quick. So, um, yeah,
Wendy Cup and we wrote over and over and
we've been doing a artisan fair for a
couple years now and it's growing and
it's been amazing and a really great
contribution I believe to the community
and Ryan and his entire family have been
great collaborators. They're partners,
they're friends of ours. We have just
had a really amazing go of like this
relationship. And even on the other side
of it, I've been to his shows. I've been
to the comedians. This is it brings
people together and they're act they're
having an amazing time and it's just
chill and a wonderful use of space and I
really hope that this does come to
fruition. Okay. Thank you, Bob. If you
don't mind, I'm going to stand up for
this so everybody can hear me. Bob
Gamberger, 101 Shotty Milro. Um, a
couple of different things I want to say
about this. First um we looked at the
distinction has been made between
agricultural and non-aggricultural
activities. The agricultural activities
because it's a farm we call this
something as of right or by right
because it's a farm you can do
agricultural things and that's one side
of it and I think that's the easy side
of it. the other side of it, the
non-aggricultural things. If you look at
his schedule of activities for this
year, for example, there are nine
things. There's live music, there's
karaoke, and there's comedians. And
these all fall under one umbrella, which
is entertainment. And I would hope that
if we go ahead and pass these
requirements that when he goes to the to
you guys to get a special permit that it
can be one special permit for all nine
events under that umbrella of
entertainment on the property. So that's
just that's one suggestion. Um as far as
what the purpose is of these rules for
those of you who don't know I once was
on this commission. In fact I chaired
the the planning and zoning commission
before Jed. Um, my vision of how this
commission should work is that we should
be facilitators. We should be coming up
with the rules and regulations that help
people do the things that they want to
do. Some people speak from a different
perspective, which is that they're
looking at ways of avoiding problems of
avoiding liabilities. And this is all
important stuff, but I think as
volunteers that serve the town, we
should be looking to try to enhance what
the town does, not to be obstacles to
it. So that's kind of my philosophy and
how I approach all this and I hope you
guys will get it at it the same way. To
echo what Wendy has said, these events,
I went to some of them last year. They
bring people together. They really are a
wonderful thing that this town hasn't
had in the past. And you know, people
talk about worrying about the size.
Frankly, I've been to Fourth of July
parties that have been bigger than his
events. In fact, I've been to Fourth of
July parties at your house that have
been bigger. Um, people talk about,
well, what if 500 people show up? We
can't get 500 people to vote on the
budget in this town. Okay? You know, if
we if he gets 50 or 70 people to show
up, that's a big turnout. And um, and
quite frankly, if he wasn't charging,
you know, to try to pay back the bans, I
don't think we would be discussing this
because it wouldn't be a commercial
endeavor. So, I'm all for it. Um, I I'
I'd like to find solutions rather than
find impediments. And um that's it.
Okay.
Hi, my name is Terra Fitch. I live at
98.
Yes. My name is Tara Fitch. 98 Shotty
Mil Road in Andover. Anyway, I'm in
support of it. I mean, obviously Ryan's
my husband, but um we live in town. We
have kids who went through the school
system. We have been to the events and
honestly they're pretty lowkey but it's
nice. Families are there, couples in
town are there. They mingle. They meet
people in town. They make connections
professionally, socially, however it is.
And just a nice environment. It would
benefit the farm itself. I think it
benefited the community in a lot of
ways. We do recognize, you know, that
some of the close proximity
neighbors, you know, noise plan and
things like that, but um one time Ryan
had the decimal thing to make sure that
it didn't go above a certain number,
otherwise he would have addressed it.
So, I think that a lot of the problems
could be mitigated and I think it's a
nice thing. I'm in support of that.
Okay. Thank you.
I don't have anything to say.
I'm in support. I'm also in support of
what
the realer probably doesn't have
anything.
I can speak for
um hi Li Manula from 177 Chieville Road.
I just want to say from like a public
health perspective, one of the like the
main things that people need to live a
happy life is community. And that's
what's Ryan that's what Ryan's bringing.
And people come together at these
events. We all do. And they're really
good. I mean, most of them we could we
went to every single one pretty much.
And they're like wrapped up by 10 pretty
much. No noise was not bad. And my dad's
a business owner and he's constantly
trying to expand on what he has. So I
only I hope the best for you.
You have anything to add? Yeah. Um, I'm
Logan Kennis 177 Road and uh I brought
all my friends with me because we all go
to pitches concerts and they're always
so fun. You know, we bring some food
down there and hang out and um see some
live music or some comedy and it's
always a great time to like see
everybody from high school and uh
everyone in town and just like make new
friends as well.
16th
and you know I've done a couple uh of
the events there and like everybody has
been saying they are lucky and really
it's not disruptive. I think it's a kind
of a good thing for our community we
should foster all
Kevinis 170 Shannon Mill Road. I'm
Logan's father. Um I brought Logan
today. he actually wanted to come and it
was a good way to kind of show the
public that this is a family oriented
thing and we as a family have gone to a
lot of these things and we're able to
bond together and meet other people from
town and it's a it's a good way for
everybody to come together and meet new
people and meet the people from town and
enjoy some live m acoustic music that's
not very loud at all. Um, and it it's
just fantastic and I'm all for it. So,
that's why I'm here. Okay.
Scott Warren, Bunker Hill Road. I'll
speak to one. Um, I also have a firm and
uh, it can be a pathetic life where you
don't make any money.
It's not funny.
And you need to do what you can legally
to make some money off your land that
you own. Well, most time the bank owns
it.
Maybe when you get old enough, you can
own. Now, positive side, what he's doing
there is great. It reminds me of some
things that used to happen in this town
that don't really happen anymore. And
he's never going to make much money
doing it. He's not He is doing it for
some money, but it's more like, oh,
maybe I made $50 tonight and it was a
great time. And it's a great time for
everyone. I bring my son there. Last
year he was eight months. And you know,
there's teenagers, young adults, old
people. You know, it's great. And they
also understand that yes, there are
there's always going to be negative. And
maybe it's a little loud sometimes. And
they can probably work on that, but
you're also
One thing's guaranteed in life. You're
never going to please everybody. There's
always going to be somebody that has a
has a problem. So, just take that into
consideration. Okay. Thank you. Next.
Biola. Route 6 425 Route 6. Um Ryan's
right behind me. Um
we have had discussion before. Um,
I called a few times about the noise
being too loud
and been um
been a nice guy about it, but um it's
definitely a different experience
if you're going to a concert versus
you want to be so quiet. So, I'm coming
from that perspective of why I'm
teaching quiet. I you know I hope the
very best for Ryan and I we we talked
about agricultural things like the
farmers market and I'm you know I think
that's exciting but
you know three hours of music you know
when it's loud it could be pretty
intense for me trying to look for peace
again if you're going to concert you
want to have a good time you want to
loosen up yeah it's a totally different
spirit so
I think you have to consider
that side of it as well.
Um, if there was a way maybe to use that
big building, maybe could have, you
know, because I'm picturing parties.
Well, are we talking about parties? They
want music outside. Do we want, you
know, do we want to have big, you know,
big speakers and stuff outside? Maybe
you can move it in a building. you know,
you're building that might,
you know, that might go a long way as
far as keeping
because my only complaint is the noise.
Really?
So,
okay. Thank you.
Okay, Erin, now you can have your 10
seconds back.
Thank you so much. Uh, sorry about
interrupting earlier. I just I didn't
know how many people were in the room.
So, I'm wondering again because I'm not
opposed to this. Um, and I think when
people say it might be 30 seconds, give
me a second. When people say, uh, I like
the music selection or I live right
behind him and I enjoy it. It's all
subjective. Again, this gentleman that
just spoke kind of, uh, reiterated that.
Is there a way to grant his permit and
let's give it a trial run for a year?
Give him the the blanket um permit for
one year and if it doesn't work out or
one event's a nightmare, we have to deal
with nine more, but then you do it event
by event the following year. Is there a
way for him to start generating money
now and we can give this a a trial run?
He has expressed to me over the phone
that if it's an issue, call me directly,
man, and we'll we'll crank it down. So,
I'm not opposed to I want this man to
succeed. I'm just concerned, like I
said, the way it's written that we don't
end up with there's no restriction on it
and we don't end up with five nights a
week, you know, blaring music. So, that
that's my my two cents. So, is there
anything the town can do for him is the
flip side to kick it off like get it get
it going and and let's give it a trial
run. Thank you.
Well, actually, uh, you know, the town
is giving it a trial run. If if we
weren't in favor of what he was wanting
to do, he wouldn't be doing it right now
because not reg. So, got Okay. And I
hope to work with him, keep it that way
while we go wrestle with there's
probably a couple of sticky points in
here that we've got to get through. Um,
but yes, I think everybody on the
commission wants to see Brian succeed.
We just need to
uh acknowledge the concerns of a couple
of the neighbors. And I think there are
ways to deal with those that can have
that win-win answer out there that
everybody's always looking for. So, I'm
confident that we can do that. We can uh
put the uh um we we can make the
regulation on a trial basis. Um nice.
Okay.
People aren't aware
and we haven't been very good at
following it, but every home occupation
is is by
regulation
subject to a 90-day review.
We haven't done many of those, but we
could. And I do think that we would end
up putting a similar kind of uh
stipulation in whatever we do here,
whether it's in his special permit when
he gets to that or in the regulation.
But it's clear that there's a lot of
people like what he's trying to do. Um,
and I thank everybody from the public
for for coming out tonight.
the uh
Jed, this is Katherine Hutchinson. You
didn't call on me when you were asking
for input from those people who were
online, so I would like a chance to
speak when appropriate. Probably here
for other reasons,
but go ahead, Catherine.
Now, I just wanted to express my concern
over the noise level. It is a problem. I
live on Bunker Hill Road for those of
you who don't know me and it is a it's
loud and um I just joined in the
sentiment to the people who live on Bear
Swamp Road about the noise and hopefully
the commission if it is seeking to
approve uh
any part of this that that noise the
decibel level be addressed in all
seriousness. Thank you. Okay. Thank you,
Katherine. I apologize for skipping over
you when I was you on the list there.
So
I think we're we're getting to the
adjourn the public hearing tonight
until the next meeting so we can a set
of revised regulations
and John get together to go with and do
some of these things. uh we about noise
that I haven't seen in regulation and
I've got out
and if we're after dark
we have some pretty
requirements
lighting
and uh I think
lighting is something that
lights we have lights in the parking
Yes, I I got
one of the things that
is
probably
Hi
to a
good answer.
Somebody mentioned the event.
Can you hear
it breaking up again? No. Jet. Jet.
Yeah. Your last your last minute or so
of dialogue was a little Okay.
here. Um, do you know when the concerts
end
farm in Carter Hill?
Oh yeah,
just looking it up. You just
so you know and you know
through the permitting process out there
noise
was a concern. And you know, this farm
is is bigger.
The uh the one that was in the newspaper
just last summer, they had a big
beautiful barn that they
would also point out that on Hill Farm,
you they got one concert listed on
schedule.
the uh
place that was, you know, written up in
the paper
had one concert listed.
How much of an inconven
would it be to end your events by nine?
That lets us
wait the lighting issue
waits I think it provides
the people while we're working on
it
to impress.
I'd have to think about that. I mean
most people got to six.
I mean Saturday.
Yeah. So I I'm gonna ask you to consider
that
I
can talk about maybe 9:30. Um I think
that's you know maybe more list. I don't
didn't put the I didn't put the time in
like I told Wayne today that um I want
to discuss that with I restrain hey we
have to be done whatever it would be
nice as a matter of faith working it
together
could wrap up about 9:00 I think that's
a better answer
personally we're not we're not
deliberating the the the application
but you know I I personally
9:00 with better numbers. But the nice
thing about the farm just I think is
when it's dark
all the lights the solar lights that we
have the lights are on the stage and
during the summer it's not dark enough
that I mean that's part of the little
atmosphere that we have. I do have
lighting. The big commercial building
that we have has pretty pretty bright
lights. Well, look at that. That's one
of the things that concern me is safety
of the people walking around. Again,
we're trying to have an event and most
event
who the bar at Carter Hill they're
selling alcohol making money. Well, I
don't know where
it might be. Okay, have to be
one more thing on the subject of sound.
Um, I'm an electrical engineer. I have
some experience with acoustic design. In
fact, I had a lot of conversations about
the acoustic panels that are in here now
with Eric over the last couple of years.
Um, I would be happy to throw my hat in
the ring, go around town during one of
these events with a sound pressure level
meter, sit on your porch or in your
living room, um, and just to try to get
some some grounding on some real numbers
on all this. And I I need to point out
that there is an enormous difference
between what is detectable, what we
notice, and what is offensive. Okay,
people talk about 60 dB, 70 dB. You
know, 80 dB is the sound of an electric
drill and a 100 dB is a jackhammer. Um,
if you go out when it's warm, the sound
of the crickets and the tree frogs is
about 75 dB. It's actually an elevated
sound pressure level. And I would be
willing to bet that that background
sound is louder on a measurement
instrument than his music is. I actually
don't actually
talking about it. I'm just throwing out.
Okay. Yeah, I've got the I've got the
sound pressure level meter on my phone.
Okay. And so, uh, you know, I I know how
to go out and get that data. Yeah, I
will. But uh
the the way the instruction is written
is to a very good standard is
we won't be a nuisance to the neighbors.
We had a couple of people that shared
some thoughts that had bordered on that
and and I'm looking for the win-win on
how to make a suggestion is you might
try
ending the concerts at 9:00 and seeing
if you get the support of your neighbors
that way. That's and that's all I'm
going to say about that. That might be
more deliberation than I'm supposed to
do here tonight. But
uh at this point, unless the commission
members have an objection, I will
continue the public hearing till our
next meeting
at 7 o'clock and updated
restriction or regulations to go
through.
Did you want to say something?
Was there somebody there that I missed?
Hello.
Was
you?
Leanne,
you
good?
Okay. Oh, she's not the bottom. Did you
have her?
Leanne, I showed you muted. I don't see
your phone number listed up there
anymore. Um,
I Yeah, this is John. I merged her I
merged her phone number with her video
feed just so it was just one listing.
Okay. Well, at this point, uh um
sorry, but we can't get in get Leanne's
comment.
We can make it at some other point. But
that that concludes the public hearing
portion of the meeting for tonight.
Thank you for attending. Thank you guys
for being involved in the community and
those folks who joined us for that
online.
Well, thank you for joining us.
That's what that's
[Music]
outside. I appreciate it. You want to
get back tonight. Thank you.
Okay. Um,
so at in time 88 I will call the regular
meeting of the planning zoning
commission to order.
First up is roll call and seating of
alternates. I see uh Ann, Patrick,
Scott, Leanne, and myself. All the
regulars are here in addition to uh the
alternates. Uh all three alternates are
with us tonight. So uh thank you all for
attending.
Um
next up is addition or changes to the
agenda. And uh I'd like to add an item
7C,
which is uh the discussion of the letter
that uh the town attorney, Dennis
O'Brien, has asked uh our zoning
enforcement officer to sign about the uh
lot line adjustment between uh the King
family and uh in the town of Andover.
So I make the motion to any other
changes to the agenda.
Okay. I make a motion to uh approve the
change one change the agenda to add item
7 C the letter B lot adjustment. Looking
for a second. A second. Okay. Thank you.
An uh any discussion?
No.
Call for vote. Ant. I. Patrick I. Scott.
Hi,
Leanne.
Jed, this is Katherine Hutchinson.
Leanne just sent me a text saying that
she can't unmute herself.
I just showed that she
did. Oh, she just did. Okay. I just a
second got in. All right. Thank you. I I
don't know what happened. I couldn't
even, you know, use the mute button.
Um, the motion. What is the motion on
the floor?
Okay. Next up, the public speak. Yes,
ma'am.
Um, what is the motion on the floor?
The motion on the floor was to add the
one item to the agenda.
The letter the lot line agenda.
The what?
the lot line adjustment between the King
family and the town of Andover that we
voted on last year at the town
Dennis O'Brien.
Well, I don't want to get into it now
because
get there. We're just going to add that
thing to the That's the And it passed
five.
Okay. And what happened was the was the
what happened to the Fitch item?
We
we adjourned the public hearing. We'll
continue it at the next meeting.
Okay, good. That's what I was going to
suggest. Thank you. Okay,
so
next up is uh we've got a free
application confer
God is coming to discuss
is planned
and uh
I'll turn it over to you and you uh you
referred to the date of the meeting
so I will pay respect to that. Um so I
believe the commission has copies of my
draft application as Wayne pointed out
uh over email. It's not complete and I'm
aware of that. The reason I'm here
tonight is because I wanted to vet
whether I should go through the process
building the application as you probably
know going through that is at least
hundreds of dollars if not more I have a
brother he
probably had to do with $20,000 on
um so basically I'm here to say um you
identified a property
Hill Road property 24.8 acres on its
known residential at this time would
like to put an energy independent AI
data center.
Now let me just talk for a second about
energy independent.
So y'all all are probably reads
I'm reading about AI taking over the
world. Analysts are saying we're going
to run out of capacity.
Capacity means
the idea. The other thing people are
saying is there's going to be a shortage
of power. So for example
um
might not be able to provide us all the
power we need. But what I wanted to do
is put um natural gas substation,
a couple of panel farms on the property
next to the
and then wide vines
point. Maybe we're going to make some
but not any kind of
you know that there are a lot more
certification that's certing
some sort of or what have you.
plan to do that. Now the main issue is
so number one the data center two
stories
um
200 by 200
relatively large but it's going to be
offset off the ground. I was out at the
property um walking the the ground the
other day and I I did also want to
mention catch that I sent you the
application to actually pay discovered
when I walked the druit
owned property so everything is going to
have to be moved up the road
possible and frankly I love the land
so that's unfortunate but um so the
issues that I need to deal with of
course number one natural gas although
it's less polluting than some of the
other energy sources out there still
need to control
any kind of pollutants coming out of
that and there are ways to do that. So
now all of that I realize I need to have
certified
um through various Connecticut agents.
So I am tracking those. I didn't ignore
them. Wayne,
um I looked at them and I, you know, I
realized, okay, I have to do something
pretty similar to this application to
Andover just for the the water. Plus, I
can't just guess what the flooding
characteristics are. I was in contact or
I attempted to contact a previous owner,
Roger Bell. I don't know if any of you
are familiar with that.
He did not respond to either an email or
a call wondering whether he did any
testing. As I walked the property, it
occurred to me that maybe we just bought
it because wanted to hunt deer on it. I
don't know. Um but in any event, it's an
unimproved property. So, um we would
need to put septic systems on there. We
need to put in a well, build the
building. We need to build a substation.
We need to put up those solar panel
farms. and also have a parking lot in
the data center. Um, and I am also aware
that the certification requires me to
get approval of the fire department and
make sure they have water available if
there's a fire. All those things I I've
looked at, but really coming up with a
solid plan is going to cost a fair sum.
and I wanted to make sure hearing from
you folks there's no chance that we're
going to be able to put a a data center
on the property then I I don't want to
try to do it and um the the why why
would Andover want this? Well, I would
say um
and I haven't gone out to any of your
local businesses to see hey you guys
need AI resources right now. I would say
for most people as a toy may be
insulting but most people are just
playing games with it but there is
tremendous potential if you're smart
efficient um so I'm seeing companies
like Sigma
like which you know is owned by CS now
um health providers I'm a veteran I've
been trying to um get in to help the VA
trying to deploy a new electronic health
record system. Um presumably there would
be some need there also for data center
resources.
Uh so I believe it would be enhance the
the tax base. I don't think we're going
to be hiring hundreds of people on in
fact in my draft application
plan
a lot of people showing off but I hope
revenue would be interesting over and
businesses that might be using AI
resources that don't have their own
in-house resources
they of course would be welcome to
customers of our services when as I said
open saford
health um
haven health
ever source are also going to be
um so again that's so the main the main
my main objective in coming here tonight
is is take as little of your time as
possible, but to hear from you whether
you know there's any chances residential
property could do what I'm asking. Wayne
also mentioned, hey, you know, we got
Route Six. There's lots of commercial
zoning. Why don't you look at that?
Well, you know, I've been looking at
Connecticut because I grew up here. This
is the property that, you know, kind of
rose to the top. So, if there's property
out there that I'm not aware of, I know
the Bolton Ice
um ice rink looked about as I drove by
looked about the largest build that's
close to what I was looking to do. Um
so, o open to options, but again, the
main objective here is, you know, should
I continue? My my real estate agent is
here. uh should we continue to consider
buying the property or is that not a
good idea just because there's no way
and and I did of course have the
opportunity to listen to the discussion
about the farm the concerns about all
that and that doesn't even environmental
factors that deal with we'll try to be
independent
so back uh
probably
12 or so years ago,
the last big thing that tried to come
into handover was a uh night a natural
gas infusion plant. It was going to be
at the uh Christmas tree farm right out
here and they got blown out of the
water. Never even made it as far as you
just did tonight. So, congratulations.
Um but that you know I think the concern
was all these tankers with natural gas
were going to come on a heavily
trafficked uh uh property and and
you know if I might make a quick comment
on that I'm not looking to generate
enough net energy to to supply all of
Connecticut or even focused on the AI
data center just so I don't have AI I
don't have ever source saying sorry you
haven't got power for you and tomorrow,
you know, we have to shut down. I just
don't that was just an example of the
last thing we we did get a little
feedback from the town at that point.
The just uh so in your in your write up
you talk about the size of this
building, right? And it's and I want to
make sure it's not a paper.
It's large. So you say in fact two story
25,000 square meter that's not feet
that's meters. Okay. Yep. That that is
huge. Well and in fact one of one of the
partners that I listed here came back to
me and said sorry our approach is we do
wooden frames. We we can't do a building
that size. We have to do. So I I
actually have made an adjustment to my
plan. Seven Summits construction out of
Hartford I think is probably a better
choice for that. But I have not gone
through all the details again because we
can't build it, you know, spending money
or asking people. I I feel guilty
inviting Ron to be here today. So So
just, you know, continuing on a little
bit. So the location of that property on
on Skinner Hill, you know, and if you if
you were to look in our plan of
conservation development, the uh the
business industrial pretty much along
Route Six at this point.
If the property were open for Route Six,
then it would certainly be easier,
right? We
So that would be a a huge industrial
thing in a completely
residential area way way off the beat
path. And and so you said, "Is there any
chance?" Yeah, there there's a chance. I
I think that's that's kind of a stretch
from my thought is is going out there.
the
I would love to have the AI data center
in town. I think a building that huge
would be, you know, we're we just got
done talking about, you know, we're
going through the plan of conservation
development. Um the businesses are 3% of
our grand list. You know, everybody else
is residential. I think you'd be able to
help us there.
The the piece of the piece of property
that I do have in mind that I think
could work well for you is called
Windhold Corners and it's right down at
the corner of Route 87 and Route Six and
it's a little bit fast there, but but we
have had conversations with that guy
that owns it
and it's not for sale now, but I don't
know why it's not for sale. I think it's
just because he hasn't got around to uh
the list is my thought. You know how big
the property is? It's I'm gonna say if
if
acres,
how many, Scott? 56. But he has parcels
off of Route 6 that are like four and
six directly adjacent to Route Six or on
the turnaround up there. And so it's
bigger, a little bigger than what you're
looking at, but I think the cost of the
property twice as big. Yeah. More than
twice as Yeah. I don't know if that's
good or bad, but if uh you that would be
someplace where I think we could
entertain
right now that that piece of property's
got a little bit along Route Six that's
business and then the rest was intended
to be residential.
I put the map on the screen, Jed.
Okay. Yeah. And uh so yeah, thank you
for that. Um
there's been talk of a vineyard on
there, right? Yeah, there we have talked
about putting a vineyard wine thing out
there. That is part of what I've been
and so I think that would be a much
better fit and work well for the town.
It's a
guy's name.
So I won't harass him, but I just it's
good to know. So we have we have the
chair of the e the inover economic
development commission on this call and
and my suggestion
the lake. Hi.
Yellow.
So, my suggestion is is that you you
guys get together and and discuss this
as as we discussed on this property on
Skinner Hill. The first hurdle is the
zone change
and that's a significant hurdle.
You've been up there. Um you you told me
you're up there. So, you know, I also
read through your requirements.
I got
there's a huge amount of wetlands on
that property.
There's there's a there's a pond. It's,
you know, bisected by a pond. There's a
pond on it. There's a lot of wetlands.
There's an intermittent stream that goes
right through the middle of it. Um,
right. And you're talking about putting
a 6 acre building on a what was it? 24
acre lot.
Well,
so when I saw you a proposal, I say I
like the proposal. I just don't I'm not
fond of the piece of property you're
going to put there. And I know why you
picked that one. That's the one that's
for sale. You look through the listings
that pops up. And so my my hope tonight
would be don't rule out Andover being a
bunch of folks who don't want to work
with you. Good. I think Well, I would
just ask you that I think better to go
to uh better parcel.
If I may, uh, our economic development
commission meeting is tomorrow.
You can add it to the agenda.
Ela, what do you think? If you're Yeah,
but it's actually on our agenda to
discuss this because it was it's an
exciting proposal. I'm like, "Oh, we
want those businesses, but it's got to
be on Route Six." You know, it it can't
be off in a residential area. Um and
it's not just Lindome Corners. We have
that whole um parcel there. Um Andover
Auto Parts. That whole parcel is and
they are trying to sell that.
Yeah. And then and then also I know
there's some property I think it's 32
acres. Uh the Jab property next to
Network.
That one they're they're in tax trouble
and they haven't been able to try to get
a hold of the owner at all. So that
might potentially go up for tax sale in
December.
Wow. Okay. So those three are all all
come to mind as like that that's where
this would fit.
[Music]
Doesn't that property being split by the
hot river be problematic?
Well, the hot river is always there.
Um, but you could find some acreage to
handle it. You because it's a large it's
they're large parcels, you know what I
mean? The the grapes vines could be over
near the Hop River. You know what I
mean? It's like the agricultural part of
this could be there.
Um, but yeah, the Hop River is always an
issue when you're trying to develop
along Route Six.
And I thought the Andover Auto Parts uh
with the the gravel bit next to it might
be too small for you, but you know, how
big is that property? Does anyone know
how big that one is because you've been
discussing it? Six acres or so. Oh,
that's only six acres. Never mind.
That would be just enough for the
building. Yeah, exactly. Never mind. I
thought that was a bigger and and there
is not enough room on that other
property. That flat area on there is not
six acres. I I know that land very well.
Which one? The the network. The one the
one that he's trying to buy, the 24 acre
piece. Oh, yeah. There might be six
acres up on the top of that hill there,
the flat area. But and and you've got
state property. You've got Nathan Hill
Farm, State property. You have you have
wetlands, Coventry Farmers Market right
next door.
Elaine, we got we we're gonna we've got
a pending problem here. The the laptop
we're using is out of battery. The
battery's running down. We don't have a
charging cord. Oh, okay. Okay. Yes. Yes.
No, you you are welcome to come to our 7
o'clock meeting otherwise, you know,
we'll have another one, you know, next
next month. Every month we meet. So, we
can let you know when that is.
Yeah. Yeah. I'll send you an email
tomorrow morning early to let you know
whether I can make it to the meeting
tomorrow. Okay, sounds great. Thanks. I
was excited to hear this. You know, I I
said, well, the last good news that came
down was the Dollar General. You know,
that was a little bit this coming and uh
folks were mixed on that. But, you know,
I think uh what you're talking about
would be good for endover if we could do
it right. And uh just don't find you a
right spot. Thank you so much for your
time and um and for generosity. And uh I
I must admit I was a little worried that
I was going to get shut down. Your your
language is pretty direct and and Wayne
was quick to tell me, "Hey, your your
application's incomplete and your your
language does say you're you have risk
of being rejected outright if you're
in." But I think I I did a good job of
saying, "Listen, I need to assess
whether it made the investment. just so
I could present to you whether it makes
sense and certainly you know um I I grew
up in weather shield so I I didn't grow
up here but you've got a beautiful town
wouldn't want to do anything undermine
the the environment
else but um
right now it looks to me like AI is
ready to blindside a lot of economies
that great if we were able to be a
little bit ahead of
It would be great. I have you here.
Yeah. So, if I uh Jed, if I might, um
Pete, it's I'm John Guskowski. I'm the
town planner. I I would be really happy
to meet with you and sort of talk
through logistics of the whole process
in in Andover.
Great. Okay. Thank you. And I I do know
how to read and I've been reading your
stuff, but a lot of it.
So, God bless you and thank you for
having me. And uh thank you Ron for
coming here. Uh um I'll we have at least
one other item on the agenda. Thank you.
Enjoy. Thank you John.
You have a way of knowing how much you
got left. We can see it's halfway. Okay.
Oh, we got that. Okay. So, yeah. Well,
How long after the last? Yeah. Well, but
it'll start flashed at us when we have
to. Uh yeah, it'll do something bad.
What What I'd like to do in the interest
of battery life is go down and uh have
Wayne talk for two minutes about this
letter that he's been asked to uh to
sign. That's item 7 C.
We're not we're not going to have
anything, but uh
well u just quickly uh I got I met with
uh Dennis O'Brien the uh handover town
council and uh apparently
there's something and it's unclear to me
exactly what it is going on
where
uh
the attorney for
Willie King
[Music]
Grim and that whole land that whole
boundary line uh agreement with the town
where they they were asking for
something that basically said that this
boundary line agreement doesn't violate
any zoning rule, any zoning regulations
or creates any zoning problems.
Attorney O'Brien
doesn't believe it does. I don't believe
it does. It's It's I don't believe it
does. I know Eric doesn't believe it
does. It's clearly created something.
It's clearly a lot adjustment that in
fact solves a a uh zoning issue.
So, um
Attorney O'Brien drafted this letter. Um
he asked, you know, that it be presented
to the board and that the board bless or
the board the board basically
um
give me permission to sign off on it and
send it off. I don't see any problem
with it. Okay. So, at this point,
I will make a motion to approve the
letter that
zoning agent drafted to send out on our
behalf.
Thank you, Ann. Any any discussion on
the letter?
Hearing none, I'll call for a vote. Dan.
Patrick. I Scott.
Can you hear me?
I
didn't I Okay, thank you. Leanne,
I I vote I as well. So, the motion
passes 500.
Next, next quick thing I want to get
done before we use up to the Nevada with
John is the approval of the minutes from
the last meeting.
Um, I'll make a motion to approve the
regular meeting minutes for plan zoning
commission on Tuesday, May 20th, 2025.
I'll second.
Okay. Thank you, Leanne. Any discussion
on those minutes?
Hearing none, I'll call for vote. And
Patrick, Scott, I
I vote I as well. The minutes are
approved. 500 Z. Now we're back to John
BC.
Okay. Um well noting it's a you know
relatively empty room and we're almost
dealing exclusively with the commission.
Um I I will not do a extended
presentation. Um I wanted to to note
hopefully everyone got a chance to re
review. We sent out a revised copy of
the economic development chapter from
the POCCD
um incorporating comments that were um
stated at last meeting as well as the
markup and comments that Jed you had
gone through. Um the the major changes
were uh you know a couple of a couple of
typos and references and then um we had
sort of downplayed the existing
um floating zone uh stuff, the mixeduse
the mixeduse zone uh opportunity. And so
we we changed most of those references
instead of establishing the that sort of
mixeduse regulation to promoting and and
enhancing to make them a little bit more
attractive and a little bit more um user
friendly for the market. So there
weren't that many substantive changes. I
think just a change in focus. Um and
hopefully um if anyone does have notes
on that based on the second um draft
which is referred to as draft revised
June 9th, 2025. Um would be happy to
receive uh additional comments on that.
Um, and then in an effort to keep on
track, um, we drafted the housing
chapter, um, that I'd be happy to share.
I'm again, I'm not going to go through
this in great depth, um, this evening.
Oh, sorry. My one comment on the
economic development thing. Oh, okay.
Yep. And so,
I know it's probably intentional, but we
don't have, you know, who's responsible
for the action items yet. And then the
paragraph right above that, you know, I
thought was the would would maybe be a
key to the whole thing unless we could
get an AI data center. It said smaller,
more dense housing options and strategic
locations to be an economic boom to the
town.
Done correctly, this can add valuable
real estate to the grand list without
substantial service needs.
And so I thought that was probably the
place where we could get the biggest
bang for the buck on our effort is
getting more housing. So that's the need
and I would put that
number two on the action item list of
priorities because as is tempting as it
is to consolidate the town garage and
transportation and move it someplace
else can be very hard. But I think we
need to and must do something with
housing and that's how we're going to,
you know, keep the budget under control.
And the number one action item that I
would put on the list is the one you
tacked on to the end, which is
incorporate economic development task
into the scope of work for the town
planning consultant. Now, I know you
probably won't like to have that hidden
in at the end, John, but dang it, that,
you know, if we're going to make some
some progress here, we're the EDC and
the planning and zoning need a little
help. We need to make sure
that we have the resources. And and I
was very disappointed
in the discussion that I heard on the
budget this year that we're cutting the
town budget. You know,
we need more help over here to be
average. You know, we we need help. So,
I would put that right up there at the
top. And that was my only comments on
that. But I think you would agree with
those Elaine.
I agree with you too, Jed.
Yeah. No, totally. Totally agree, Jed to
make that one of the priorities. Very
good. Yeah. And uh
Okay. Now, back to the house. Okay. Oh,
can I can I just one more thing on the
EDC because I know I had I had mentioned
it last time. Um it's just kind of a
little sniggly thing um that you still
when it comes to coming up with events
and things like that, you still have in
there talking about the rock paper
scissors and the roambo.
And I basically think if nobody has any
clue what you're talking about that that
was just a little too specific. But you
know just kind of developing some kind
of tournaments or festivals
is good enough as opposed to rock paper
scissors because I I still don't even
know what that is. I thought it was
somebody's attempt to humor the day.
Yeah, I know.
Well, that's that's fine. I I mean this
was this was a suggestion from from EDC
specifically and I mean because from
Viata I know it was biata
well so yeah I mean we could I don't
know what are you suggesting Elaine to
to something of this type or to get no
develop tournaments and festivals
surrounding the history of the town
okay the town history
Because once again, I mean, when people
read through this stuff, they'll all a
sudden say, "What the hell is that?"
Yeah.
Yeah. It's a It's a teaching
opportunity. Yeah.
Okay. Battery's running. Yep. Enough of
that fun.
Okay. All right. So, we can we can
refresh. Thank you, Elaine. Yep.
Um, okay. So, uh, let's see. Housing.
I'll share that. Okay. So, uh, again,
this is, um, the, uh, vision statement
that we envision in Andover that strives
to create a more more affordable housing
to welcome a wider variety of residents
and households and ensures opportunity
for residents to thrive throughout their
life stages. Um we go through a lot of
the background and the data that was
available uh as part of the affordable
housing plan. Um that talks about the
the age of our units, the you know the
distribution um the relative drop off of
new construction over the last really 15
years or so. Um and then places and over
you know in its context in terms of
median household price, household sizes
and and um and that sort of thing. So,
we go through the the demographics and
and what's that affordability. Um, we
talk a bit about um Alice and the need
for affordable housing for not only our
current population but also populations
of Connecticut and and projected uh
population relative to housing grow
housing costs
um and the need for uh increased
opportunities for empty nesters and and
young families and and first-time home
buyers and those sorts of things. So it
it's a it's a lot of sort of going
through a lot of that data. Um and then
we focus on the aims and objectives, the
strategy items. Um and I'll just I'll
read briefly the the the four big core
uh goals which are to ensure adequate
housing for individuals of all ages and
incomes is available within Andover with
a focus on allowing for allowing
residents to age in town and young
adults to remain in town and grow their
families. Second to allow for a variety
of types of affordable housing. Third is
increase the number of affordable
housing units through incentives and
density bonuses where appropriate. And
fourth is to encourage additional
housing in locations near existing
services and transportation options. Um
and then we go through a variety. I
think there's about there's 13 specific
recommendations um looking at different
sections of the regulations to tweak for
additional density or um you know
restriction um requiring restrictions on
income as well as looking at specific
grant or funding opportunities that the
town could pursue to create either
carrots or sticks to to incor encourage
more um affordable housing development.
Um, so I I I won't go through all of
those. I'm happy hopefully people have
gotten a chance to take a look and I'm
happy to listen to any comments. Um, and
and then you know we we'll talk about
this next month as well.
I thought that action or strategy number
six was done. The uh ADUs as of right I
I thought it was still a special permit.
Am I in special permit unless it's as of
right if you rent restrict it
restrict it but if you want to not have
it restricted then I see yeah
so then it's a special permit. Yeah. And
so this this is this is recommending
going going making it
um either
shifting it a little bit and so making
it easier for everyone. So either make
it as of right across the board or make
it uh an affordable restriction across
the board. So it could be as of right
but you're you're you're restricting. So
to basically encourage more of them one
way or another. So but but yeah
but we can we can we can look at that a
little bit more. Okay. And just as a
reminder Yeah. Just as a reminder to
everybody, we don't allow ADUs in Lake
District unless you've got like
three acres of land.
You don't allow accessory dwelling units
in the lake district.
No,
ourselves here a little bit. Great write
up.
One word that I got heartburn with the
very last sentence of the
various methods of achieving goals and
were discussed in the end portal housing
plan. Continued commitment to achieving
them will result in sustained efficiency
housing stock. If we continue to commit
the way we have over the last couple
years, we will get zero.
Where?
So, get rid of that. Continue. Where is
Where? I'm sorry. Where is that? That is
the second line up above and objectives.
Yeah,
we we have done I think we've done an
okay job with the the regulations, but
no, we have done nothing for affordable
housing. Okay. Yeah. Identified the last
plan of conservation the three or four
areas where
I don't know if that's in this new
version. It it is that's about all we've
done. So adding to what you said, you
know, right? Yeah. But you know how much
affordable housing did we we have in the
last five years? Right.
Right. Yeah. That's a thing.
So, you know, we either don't believe
that we want more affordable housing
and we just pay lip service to it or we
got to start doing something. But, you
know, to continue on as we have gone is
not going to get us anywhere.
So, does affordable housing falls under
what's the moment? affordable housing.
We we do have a regulation for 55 and
over plan residential development but
you know we can do other stuff too uh
that okay maybe this is not the platform
to discuss it about I'm concerned with
affordable housing.
Yes I think we all are just so and it
takes you know strategy one is the key
to this whole thing. We have to create
an affordable housing committee to work
on it.
and and that was that was item number
one in our affordable housing plan, you
know, and we don't have one. So, we need
to if if we fix this or start making any
progress at all, we got to go out and
start tackling it. And uh
going to take a much bigger effort than
anybody wants to do right now. Yep. And
I think that's because we're all happy
living in our little single family
single houses, right?
Yeah. And I think affordable housing, if
I may see, it comes with a lot of
problems. I think that needs to be
addressed and looked at. Yep. Everything
else. So, I mean, well, and we're
looking for, you know,
Alice housing, not you, not lowinccome
housing. You know, we're talking about
policemen and teachers and uh uh you
know, nurses and stuff like that that
you would love to have. So I I think
this town would be perfect for
I do too. I'm looking for one. Yeah, I
think I mean that's that's an option.
Further up back after talking about the
hog homes at Riverside Drive. It says
section 4.14
of the regulation
currently caps the density of six
bedrooms
that
septic systems or is that just that was
I think it was due to septic systems. We
used to have a requirement that you
could only have a 5,000galon
and I think it's like 150 gallons per
person per day
goes into that. Right. So it's it's Go
ahead. We moved up to 7500. So that's a
50% increase in the septic design. So we
we can make that and there's a lot of
technology going on in septic designs
now. I think we can make that much
better than that.
Yes, it would.
Yeah. So, it's it's it's 150 gallons per
bedroom. Um, and so 7500 gallons equates
to basically 50 bedrooms worth on on any
given lot. So, assuming your soils are
decent or you have enough acreage, you
could actually do a fairly substantial
development.
[Music]
Yes, that's changed that one thing new
new stuff.
Any other comments?
So, what we would ask is if so, everyone
hopefully has the word version of this.
um if you do have edits and I' I've made
a couple of notes this evening, we'll
plan to send out um a revised version of
this and um you know in the next few
weeks in advance of the next meeting and
then in advance of the next meeting we
will prepare the next chapter which I
believe is the quality of life uh
chapter.
Um, and and Jed, to your initial point,
yes, we will when we have all the
chapters drafted, we will also be
producing an implementation guide that
has the the to-do list for who's who's
doing what and when.
I was a little surprised that in the
background your lead in paragraph talked
about in the remaining 2% are mobile
home
to see that there was a mobile home in
Andover. Well, that's what the Census
Bureau says.
Okay. Because you know,
one thing you probably got to do is
upgrade our regulations to allow mobile
home some extent. Even though
everybody's excited about that either,
but that that's in 50 5002. Yeah, it is.
It is. It's um yeah, for an individual
lot like mobile manufactured homes are
to be treated the same as standard
single family stickuilt houses.
Um so which not to say you could put a
trailer park on your residential
property, but you could put a trailer
style home as your as your residence.
Yes. Yeah. Now, is there something that
we should recognize in this chapter on
affordable housing that uh
discusses anything coming out of what
the state working on right now? Um I
don't think No, I I I I don't think so.
Um what what 502 would require is uh a
modification of how we approach our
affordable housing plan principally.
That's the major change that that would
address zoning uh planning and zoning
and it would just
um establish a numerical target for
housing generation
mostly through regulations, you know,
incentives, policies, requirements, and
that sort of thing. It doesn't require
the town to build anything or to to
fundamentally do anything different with
how it's um
uh building, but but it would it would
be primarily a regulatory change and and
you know, this chapter in specific, you
know, talks up and down about the need
to encourage more of these things. So I
I think any affordable housing plan uh
with a specific numerical target that
would come out of the town would be very
much in line with uh the the direction
and thrust of this chapter.
Okay.
Any other comments from anybody else
who's here on on the housing thing?
Okay. What else you got for us, John?
Um, well, I mean, we could we could talk
a little bit more about 5002. Um, which
which does have a number of things that
towns are going to have to to look at.
Um, it's, by the way, it's it passed
both House uh and Senate sitting on
Lamont's desk. Um, he hasn't decided
whether or not he's going to sign it
yet. It seems likely he's going to allow
it to pass into law over the next week,
whether he signs it or just, you know,
lets it be, which would be an automatic
approval. Um but he will probably bring
the legislature into special session
this summer to address some of the more
problematic things. A lot of towns had
problems with um uh there is an
elimination of arbitrary minimum parking
standards in local zoning um in in favor
in favor of instead allowing or
requiring developers to demonstrate that
they have sufficient parking for their
anticipated parking demand. In other
words, case by case, a developer would
come in and say, "Hey, I've got here's a
Starbucks or here's a Chick-fil-A or
here's a Dollar General. I I'm going to
need 75 parking spots and here they
are." Rather than rather than the town
saying if you have 2,000 square feet of
retail, you need da da da parking. And
and it, you know, eliminates the
formulaic and and goes to the specific.
Um
there's also an as of right provision
that commercially zoned property could
become middle housing which is to say
two to nine units of housing. Um that's
a little bit of a problematic provision
that may get excised if we go into
special session. Um there's another
provision that would require every
municipality regardless of size to have
a um a fair rent commission. Um but
there's also a provision that would
allow municipalities to regionalize
their fair rent commission. So it's
certainly possible that you know Andover
will be you know asked to participate in
a CRUG you know regional fair rent
commission or you know Bolton Coventry
Andover Colombia will won't go into one
together. Um
anyway there's there's a there's there's
a number of provisions. I I don't think
any one of them is going to dramatically
change the way Andover does business or
does it planning. Um, I I do think that
if we have to write a fair housing plan
or a a an affordable housing plan under
the new provisions, it'll just require
the town to be a little bit more
aggressive with some of the regulatory
changes that it's it's looking at. Um,
but again, I it's it's not it's not a uh
it's not a C change. How did the fair
share conduct discussion end up? So the
the a fair share report was issued um
and and this this bill and and there
they the consultant used three or four
different methodologies to come up with
sort of different numbers. One was sort
of based on economic opportunity within
the community. Others was based on sort
of proximity to transit and job centers.
Um others was dealt with the sort of
level of throughput of of applications
for development. Um and uh they they
settled on this bill 502
um settled on methodology A of the study
which you know sets up a a number and I
I regret I don't have Andover's number
off hand but it it sets a big number
which in Andover is is not that big.
It's it maybe 200 units or something
like that which you know relatively
speaking is a lot but um this bill would
then
this bill would then take a quarter of
that and that would be the town's target
for the first 10-year period. So again
let's I I'm let's assume the number is
200. I think it's probably lower than
that. But then we take a quarter of
that. 50 units. And that's what the
town's target would be over the next 10
years is how can we improve the
regulations, improve the regulatory
environment, you know, through a system
of incentives and and requirements, you
know, make it possible for that number
of units to be built. And so it's just
it just places a number on the town's
trajectory.
Okay.
What happened? Have we Have we contacted
the governor's office? Push back some of
it. I know Eric has. Good. The governor
was here. Push back for what reason?
The reason it's that's a that's a high
number for a small town like that.
It's um
Yeah.
mandate the towns on on what they need
to target as far as affordable housing.
Okay. Well, so there's there's been a
federal law called the Fair Housing Act
that's been in place for 55 years and
towns like Andover have basically
ignored it for five decades. So at some
point you got to follow the law.
Well, I'll disagree with the stateing
and regulating towns. Okay. But this the
state controls zoning. Any any authority
that towns have is granted to it by the
state. So it's it's it's not as if the
town is an independent entity with with
uh uh sovereignty of its own. Listen,
my my my wife is a real estate lawyer
and she can probably get into it with
you more. So, I'll be more than happy.
Send her my number. Absolutely.
I disagree with this. So, okay. Yep. A
lot of people do. That's why
why there's such a problem in the town
in this town and every other rural town.
That's why we're here because it's
rural.
Want to keep it that way.
Okay. I think uh so
that's old business. The new business uh
we're not doing anything on Michael
Heckler. He'll start next time. Uh we
deferred that at his request
and we'll continue the zoning regulation
text amendment application
and uh we voted last time that we would
have the
special permit for pitch the next one
too. I don't know if he can do that
based on where we are now because he
doesn't know but we put in it
but that's that's his choice. We have
no, we have to uh act on it. And uh let
let me ask you this. Um
do you want me to talk to Ryan Fitch and
perhaps um ask him to withdraw that
application? I think it would be in his
best interest. Okay.
It would make this whole process go a
little different. Y So I'm sorry. You
withdraw his activity application versus
the uh regulation application? a special
permit application he has. Right. Okay.
Yeah.
It's just not tied.
Right. He and he has a lot of work to do
also, Jed. He has to have a I mean some
sort of diagram. I know he doesn't have
a lot of money, but he has to have
uh that's true. The uh
Yes. Yeah. I'm not saying he needs an
engineer, but something something has to
be drawn up that he has to show us.
he has to be able to come to us with
something that meets all the
requirements. So my focus right now is
on BOC and trying to get through the
regulations to us there. Um
see how cooperative teams
[Music]
that sort of thing
by next month.
One thing I realized
documents that
was signing.
I didn't know what where that was coming
from. Now it makes sense that
[Music]
but the music was
Well, we can't Yeah, we can't uh
we shouldn't be talking about that at
this point. I just I just made a
like Saturday night. We're not talking
this so I don't hear that.
So, next up is correspondence.
Anything on that?
Look at my notes.
Um, no, no, no, no correspondence. Okay.
Well, the only correspondence was
we we discussed this under item
item five, the pre-application
conference. Okay, moving on to
administrative reports. Uh, you're up
again, Wayne. We're
So, I'm happy to say uh that I in that
did pass the Casio level one exam,
which I was
really worried that I did pass it, but I
I got notified that I did. Okay, so
having said that, um
something came to my Congratulations.
Can you hear me? Some something was
brought to my attention involving a real
estate offering on on Wales Road uh that
I did my research on. Learned that that
property
um is not a lot of record.
It's not a it's not a lot that's been
reported.
And in further research, uh,
I
listed these
attorneys
of and they confirm my opinion that a
lot of record cannot be offered for
sale. A lot that is lot that is not on
the record not be offered for sale.
So
I am working with the land owner and the
real estate and there's been a lot of
back and forth between them
resistance I'll be honest
notice of violation is pending and issue
voluntary compliance is not forthcoming.
a uh
a play complaint that I investigated the
Hutcherson Road. Um after my
investigation, I determined
it was mostly unsubstantiated.
However, there are some cars on the
property that are not registered or
being found.
They are in good shape, not jump or
anything like that.
So I'm monitoring that again for
[Music]
where is that last one question in row
thanks specifics I don't want to discuss
in a public forum forum individual teams
and things like that right
so um
I've also brought what information I
gleaned from my investigation to the
town assessor.
There was a complaint
build
clearing a lot
and and
not against any of our rules to cut your
trees down.
Um,
but uh it appears as though the
complainant is is working with the
landlord
who purchased the property behind them.
Hopefully that goes away because of
that.
I investigated a bite violation on Hill
Road.
zoning violation would have been in a
camp trailer
taking up residence in a camp trailer.
I'm unable to substantiate that portion
of the complaint. However, a potential
blind issue does remain.
[Music]
again and
hoping for voluntary compliance before
um don't go down the road of of writing
them for
on um on Andover Lake
remember the name of the road but it
it's it's it's actual I I did deny an
application for a deck
because it was proposed
I watermark is against our rule.
That's the end of my report. Okay,
for Wayne
I didn't think that I saw the camp
trailer.
That's an angle.
I noticed the kids.
Well, no.
Wait a
wetland water
there. Anything else, John? Uh, nothing
else for me, Jeff.
Okay,
we've already approved the minutesly
scheduled
with a uh
public hearing prior to
7 o'clock on July 15.
We'll try and find the real owl.
I I apologize. I thought of coming out
here this morning. Everything was okay
and set up, but then I said, "Yeah, what
could go wrong?"
Those are the magic words.
Okay. Um, anybody else have anything
for tonight? John. John, what is your
number?
I'm sorry. Phone number. My phone number
8251.
Okay. Thanks. Thank you.
Okay. If nothing else, it's 910.
Make a motion to adjourn. Second.
All in favor say I. I. Any oppos?
Any abstaining? Motion 500. Thank you uh
everybody for